On this page

There are three ways of converting or exporting data to Parquet:

* [Export query as file via REST](#export-query-as-file-via-rest)
* [Export query as files via COPY](#export-query-as-files-via-copy)
* [In-place conversion](#in-place-conversion)

## Data Compression[​](#data-compression "Direct link to Data Compression")

By default, Parquet files generated by QuestDB are uncompressed. One of the key advantages of Parquet
over QuestDB’s native format is its built-in compression.

You can configure compression in `server.conf` with:

```prism-code
# zstd  
cairo.partition.encoder.parquet.compression.codec=6  
# level is from 1 to 22, 1 is fastest  
cairo.partition.encoder.parquet.compression.level=10
```

You can override these defaults when [exporting via COPY](#export-query-as-files-via-copy).

## Export queries as files[​](#export-queries-as-files "Direct link to Export queries as files")

To export a query as a file, you can use either the `/exp` REST API endpoint or the `COPY` command.

### Export query as file via REST[​](#export-query-as-file-via-rest "Direct link to Export query as file via REST")

tip

See also the [/exp documentation](/docs/query/rest-api/#exp---export-data).

You can use the same parameters as when doing a [CSV export](/docs/query/rest-api/#exp---export-data), only passing `parquet` as the `fmt` parameter value.

```prism-code
curl -G \  
  --data-urlencode "query=select * from market_data limit 3;" \  
  'http://localhost:9000/exp?fmt=parquet' > ~/tmp/exp.parquet
```

By default, the Parquet file will not be compressed, but it can be controlled with the `server.conf` variables above.

note

Exporting via REST API is a synchronous process. For larger queries you might
prefer to use the `COPY` method below

Once exported, you can just use it from anywhere, including DuckDB, Pandas, or Polars. If you wanted
to point DuckDB to the example file exported in the previous example, you could
start DuckDB and execute:

```prism-code
select * from read_parquet('~/tmp/exp.parquet');
```

### Export query as files via COPY[​](#export-query-as-files-via-copy "Direct link to Export query as files via COPY")

tip

See also the [COPY-TO documentation](/docs/query/sql/copy/).

If you prefer to export data via SQL, or if you want to export asynchronously, you
can use the `COPY` command from the web console, from any pgwire-compliant client,
or using the [`exec` endpoint](/docs/query/rest-api/#exec---execute-queries) of the REST API.

You can export a query:

```prism-code
COPY (select * from market_data limit 3) TO 'market_data_parquet_table' WITH FORMAT PARQUET;
```

Or you can export a whole table:

```prism-code
COPY market_data TO 'market_data_parquet_table' WITH FORMAT PARQUET;
```

The output files (one per partition) will be under `$QUESTDB_ROOT_FOLDER/export/$TO_TABLE_NAME/`.

The `COPY` command will return immediately, but the export happens in the background. The command will return an export
id string:

| id |
| --- |
| 45ba24e5ba338099 |

If you want to monitor the export process, you can issue a call like this:

```prism-code
SELECT * FROM 'sys.copy_export_log' WHERE id = '45ba24e5ba338099';
```

While it is running, export can be cancelled with:

```prism-code
COPY '45ba24e5ba338099' CANCEL;
```

By default, the Parquet files will not be compressed, unless server-side configuration is applied, as seen above.
However, you can override the compression individually for each export. For example:

```prism-code
COPY market_data TO 'market_data_parquet_table' WITH FORMAT PARQUET COMPRESSION_CODEC LZ4_RAW;
```

## In-place conversion[​](#in-place-conversion "Direct link to In-place conversion")

warning

At the moment, converting to Parquet in-place is work-in-progress and
not recommended for production. We recommend caution and taking a snapshot before starting any
in-place data conversion.

When using in-place conversion, the partition(s) remain under QuestDB's control, and data can still be queried as if it
were in native format.

note

It is recommended to use QuestDB 9.0.1 or higher, as some features, like arrays on Parquet partitions, were not
supported in previous versions.

At its current state, in-place conversion of native partitions into Parquet has the following limitations:

* We have been testing Parquet support for months, and we haven't experienced data corruption or data loss, but this is
  not guaranteed. It is strongly advised to back up first.
* We have seen cases in which querying Parquet partitions leads to a database crash. This can happen if metadata in the
  table is different from metadata in the Parquet partitions, but it could also happen in other cases.
* While converting data, writes to the partitions remain blocked.
* After a partition has been converted to Parquet, it will not register any changes you send to that partition,
  including respecting any applicable TTL, unless you convert back to native.
* Schema changes are not supported.
* Some parallel queries are still not optimized for Parquet.
* There is no compression by default (but it can be [enabled via config](#data-compression) values)

For the reasons above, we recommend not using in-place conversion in production yet, unless you test extensively with
the shape of the data and queries you will be running, and take frequent snapshots.

All those caveats should disappear in the next few months, when we will announce it is ready for production.

### Basics of In-place conversion[​](#basics-of-in-place-conversion "Direct link to Basics of In-place conversion")

Converting partitions from native format to Parquet, or from Parquet into native format, is done via `ALTER TABLE`. You
need to pass a filter specifying the partitions to convert. The filter can be either a `WHERE` or a `LIST`, in the same
way it is used for the [`DETACH` command](/docs/query/sql/alter-table-detach-partition/).

tip

The active (most recent) partition will never be converted into Parquet, even if it matches the filter.

Conversion is asynchronous, and can take a while to finish, depending on the number of partitions, on the partition size,
on the compression being used, and on disk performance and general load of the server.

To monitor how the conversion is going, you can issue a [`SHOW PARTITIONS`](/docs/query/sql/show/#show-partitions)
command. Partitions in the Parquet format will have the `isParquet` column set to `true` and will show the size on the
`parquetFileSize` column.

### Converting from Native Format into Parquet[​](#converting-from-native-format-into-parquet "Direct link to Converting from Native Format into Parquet")

```prism-code
ALTER TABLE trades CONVERT PARTITION TO PARQUET WHERE timestamp < '2025-08-31';
```

From this moment on, any changes sent to the affected partitions will be discarded.

### Converting from Parquet into Native Format[​](#converting-from-parquet-into-native-format "Direct link to Converting from Parquet into Native Format")

```prism-code
ALTER TABLE trades CONVERT PARTITION TO NATIVE WHERE timestamp < '2025-08-31';
```